1. Demonstrates Ethical Practice
Definition: Understands and consistently applies coaching ethics and standards of coaching
1.01. Demonstrates personal integrity and honesty in interactions with clients, sponsors and relevant stakeholders
1.02. Is sensitive to clients’ identity, environment, experiences, values and beliefs
1.03. Uses language appropriate and respectful to clients, sponsors and relevant stakeholders
1.04. Abides by the ICF Code of Ethics and upholds the ICF Core Values
1.05. Maintains confidentiality with client information per stakeholder agreements and pertinent laws
1.06. Maintains the distinctions between coaching, consulting, psychotherapy and other support professions
1.07. Refers clients to other support professionals, as appropriate
2. Embodies a Coaching Mindset
Definition: Engages in ongoing personal and professional learning and development as a coach. Works with coaching supervisors or mentor coaches as needed. Develops and maintains a mindset that is open, curious, flexible and client-centered.
2.01. Acknowledges that clients are responsible for their own choices
2.02. Engages in ongoing learning and development as a coach, including remaining aware of current coaching best practices and use of technology
2.03. Develops an ongoing reflective practice to enhance one’s coaching
2.04. Remains aware of and open to the influence of biases, context and culture on self and others
2.05. Uses awareness of self and one’s intuition to benefit clients
2.06. Develops and maintains the ability to manage one’s emotions
2.07. Maintains emotional, physical, and mental well-being in preparation for, throughout, and following each session
2.08. Seeks help from outside sources when necessary
2.09. Nurtures openness and curiosity in oneself, the client, and the coaching process
2.10. Remains aware of the influence of one’s thoughts and behaviors on the client and others
3. Establishes and Maintains Agreements
Definition: Partners with the client and relevant stakeholders to create clear agreements about the coaching relationship, process, plans and goals. Establishes agreements for the overall coaching engagement as well as those for each coaching session.
3.01. Describes one’s coaching philosophy and clearly defines what coaching is and is not for potential clients and stakeholders
3.02. Reaches agreement about what is and is not appropriate in the relationship, what is and is not being offered, and the responsibilities of the client and relevant stakeholders, including commitment to working toward coaching goals
3.03. Reaches agreement about the guidelines and specific parameters of the coaching relationship such as logistics, fees, scheduling, duration, termination, confidentiality and inclusion of others
3.04. Partners with the client and relevant stakeholders to establish an overall coaching plan and goals
3.05. Partners with the client to determine client-coach compatibility
3.06. Partners with the client to identify or reconfirm what they want to accomplish in the session
3.07. Partners with the client to define what the client believes they need to address or resolve to achieve what they want to accomplish in the session
3.08. Partners with the client to define or reconfirm measures of success for what the client wants to accomplish in the coaching engagement or individual session
3.09. Partners with the client to manage the time and focus of the session
3.10. Continues coaching in the direction of the client’s desired outcome unless the client indicates otherwise
3.11. Partners with the client to close the coaching relationship in a way that respects the client and the coaching experience
3.12. Revisits the coaching agreement when necessary to ensure the coaching approach is meeting the client's needs
4. Cultivates Trust and Safety
Definition: Partners with the client to create a safe, supportive environment that allows the client to share freely. Maintains a relationship of mutual respect and trust.
4.01. Seeks to understand the client within their context which may include their identity, environment, experiences, values and beliefs
4.02. Demonstrates respect for the client’s identity, perceptions, style and language and adapts one’s coaching to the client
4.03. Acknowledges and respects the client’s unique talents, insights and work in the coaching process
4.04. Shows support, empathy and concern for the client
4.05. Acknowledges and supports the client’s expression of feelings, perceptions, concerns, beliefs and suggestions
4.06. Demonstrates openness and transparency as a way to display vulnerability and build trust with the client
5. Maintains Presence
Definition: Is fully conscious and present with the client, employing a style that is open, flexible, grounded and confident
5.01. Remains focused, observant, empathetic and responsive to the client
5.02. Demonstrates curiosity during the coaching process
5.03. Remains aware of what is emerging for self and client in the present moment
5.04. Manages one’s emotions to stay present with the client
5.05. Demonstrates confidence in working with strong client emotions during the coaching process
5.06. Is comfortable working in a space of not knowing
5.07. Creates or allows space for silence, pause or reflection
6. Listens Actively
Definition: Focuses on what the client is and is not saying to fully understand what is being communicated in the context of the client systems and to support client self-expression
6.01. Considers the client’s context, identity, environment, experiences, values and beliefs to enhance understanding of what the client is communicating
6.02. Reflects or summarizes what the client is communicating to ensure clarity and understanding
6.03. Recognizes and inquires when there is more to what the client is communicating
6.04. Notices, acknowledges and explores the client’s emotions, energy shifts, non-verbal cues or other behaviors
6.05. Integrates the client’s words, tone of voice and body language to determine the full meaning of what the client is communicating
6.06. Notices trends in the client’s behaviors and emotions across sessions to discern themes and patterns
7. Evokes Awareness
Definition: Facilitates client insight and learning by using tools and techniques such as powerful questioning, silence, metaphor or analogy
7.01. Considers client experience when deciding what might be most useful
7.02. Challenges the client as a way to evoke awareness or insight
7.03. Asks questions about the client, such as their way of thinking, values, needs, wants and beliefs
7.04. Asks questions that help the client explore beyond current thinking
7.05. Invites the client to share more about their experience in the moment
7.06. Notices what is working to enhance client progress
7.07. Adjusts the coaching approach in response to the client’s needs
7.08. Helps the client identify factors that influence current and future patterns of behavior, thinking or emotion
7.09. Invites the client to generate ideas about how they can move forward and what they are willing or able to do
7.10. Supports the client in reframing perspectives
7.11. Shares observations, knowledge, and feelings, without attachment, that have the potential to create new insights for the client
8. Facilitates Client Growth
Definition: Partners with the client to transform learning and insight into action. Promotes client autonomy in the coaching process.
8.01. Works with the client to integrate new awareness, insight or learning into their worldview and behaviors
8.02. Partners with the client to design goals, actions and accountability measures that integrate and expand new learning
8.03. Acknowledges and supports client autonomy in the design of goals, actions and methods of accountability
8.04. Supports the client in identifying potential results or learning from identified action steps
8.05. Invites the client to consider how to move forward, including resources, support and potential barriers
8.06. Partners with the client to summarize learning and insight within or between sessions
8.07. Partners with the client to integrate learning and sustain progress throughout the coaching engagement
8.08. Acknowledges the client’s progress and successes
8.09. Partners with the client to close the session
